CHARTER OF ARDEN
Arden
Name and General Powers
Section 1
(a) The inhabitants of the Village of Arden, in New Castle County, Delaware, and their successors within the limits
hereinafter prescribed or hereafter established, are hereby constituted, created and established a municipal
corporation and body politic forever, by the name and style of the "Village of Arden", hereinafter "the Village".
(b) Under that name they shall have perpetual succession; may have and use a corporate seal, which may be
altered, changed or renewed at pleasure; may sue and be sued; for any public, municipal educational or
charitable purpose, may acquire by gift, grant, purchase, lease, demise, bequest or otherwise hold, real and
personal property within and without the limits hereinafter prescribed; for the common benefit may dispose of
real and personal property owned or held by it; and shall possess in addition to the powers expressly
enumerated or specifically mentioned in this Act, all powers, which under the Constitution of the State of
Delaware, it is now or in the future may be, lawful for this Act to enumerate. All powers of the Village, whether
expressed or implied, shall be exercised as prescribed by this Act. If no procedure or manner of exercise be
prescribed herein the same shall be exercised as prescribed by an appropriate ordinance or resolution of the
Town Assembly of Arden.
Territorial Limits
Section 2
(a) The corporate limits of the Village are hereby established and declared to be as follows:
BEGINNING at a point on the southeasterly right of way line or Marsh Road (at 60 feet wide), said point of
Beginning being in the center line of the West Branch of Naamans Creek and a corner for lands now or
formerly of the Trustees of Ardentown; thence from said point of Beginning and along the said center line of the
West Branch of Naamans Creek by the various courses thereof in a generally southeasterly direction and
along line of said lands now or formerly of the Trustees of Ardentown, lands now or formerly of the Albert T.
Hanby Foundation, along the southwesterly boundary line of Highland Woods, along line of lands now or
formerly of Stockdale Corp., and along the southwesterly boundary line of Indian Field, 3900±feet to a point;
thence along the northwesterly line of Ardentown, South 62°-08'-05" West, 2291.79 feet to a point in the center
line of Grubb or Harvey Road, said course crossing over an existing monument set on the southwesterly side
of Orchard Road (at 38 feet wide) and crossing Apple Tree Lane and Millers Road (at 38 feet wide) ; thence
along the said center line of Grubb or Harvey Road, North 20°-05’-50" West, 5.75 feet to a point; thence along
line of lands now or formerly of Alfred Strickler the three following described courses and distances: (1) South
63°-05'-40" West, and passing through a 48 inch tulip poplar tree, 86.89 feet to a point; (2) South 60°-31'-00"
West, 127.20 feet to a point; and (3) South 58°-45’-00" West, 131.90 feet to a point, a corner for said lands now
or formerly of Alfred Strickler and lands known as Ardencroft; thence along the northwesterly line of said lands
known as Ardencroft and lands now or formerly of the Ardencroft Association known as the Mushroom House
Lot, South 57°-38’-50" West, 1356.16 feet to an existing pipe in the northeasterly line of lands now or formerly
of Benjamin J. Steinbery et ux; thence thereby North 25°-04’-24", West, 1354.00 feet to a point, a corner for
lands now or formerly of Samuel B. Eure et ux; thence along the northeasterly line of said lands now or
formerly of Samuel B. Eure et ux, North 25°-00’-25" West, 777.10 feet to a monument located on the said
southeasterly right of way line of Marsh Road; thence along the said southeasterly right of way line of Marsh
Road the three following described courses and distances: (1) North 58°-31’-13" East. 758.02 feet to a point,
said course crossing said Grubb or Harvey Road; (2) North 56°-54’-59" East, 1062.84 feet to a point of
curvature; and (3) northeasterly along a curve to the left having a radius of 984.93 feet. an arc distance of
317.89 feet to a point in the said center line of the West Branch of Naamans Creek and a corner for said lands
now or formerly of the Trustees of Ardentown and the point and place of Beginning, said course being distant
by a chord of North 47°-40’-12" East, 316.51 feet from the last described point. CONTAINING within such
metes and bounds, and including Grubb or Harvey Road, 159.00 acres of land be the same more or less...
(b) The Town Assembly may, at any time hereafter, cause a survey and plot of the village to be made, and said
plot or any supplement thereto, when so made and approved by the Town Assembly, signed by the Secretary
of the Town Assembly, who shall affix thereto the municipal corporate seal of the Village, and upon being
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of the State of Delaware in and for New Castle County, shall be
the record thereof, and such record, or a duly certified copy thereof, shall be evidence in all Courts of Law and
Equity of this State.
Definitions
Section 3
As used in this Act
(a) Resident shall mean a person, male or female, above the age of eighteen (18) years, who shall have resided in
the Village for a period of six consecutive months immediately preceding each referendum or each meeting of
the Town Assembly of Arden held pursuant to this Act.
(b) General referendum shall refer to an election or vote conducted among the residents of the Village of Arden. The
approval of any measure or the election of any candidate shall require a majority of the valid votes cast by eligible voters.
(c) Trustee shall mean a person serving as Trustee under a certain Indenture made the 31st day of January, 1908
wherein the lands described in Section 2 hereof, were conveyed upon certain trusts.
(d) Leaseholder shall mean a person who leases a portion of the lands described in Section 2 hereof, from the
Trustees serving under said Indenture. 58 Del. Laws, c. 91
Structure of Government
Section 4
The government of the Village and the exercise of all powers conferred by this Act, except as otherwise provided
herein, shall be vested in the Town Assembly of the Village of Arden, referred to herein as the "Town Assembly". The Town
Assembly shall consist of all residents of the Village.
Meetings of the Town Assembly
Section 5
(a) Regular meetings of the Town Assembly shall be held on the fourth Monday of January, March, June and
September of each year after the approval of this Act at the Gild Hall in the Village or other suitable public place
in the Village. Written notice of the time, date and place of all regular meetings of the Town Assembly shall be
mailed by the Secretary of the Town Assembly to all residents of the Village at least 5 days prior thereto.
(b) Special meetings of the Town Assembly shall be called by the Secretary of the Town Assembly (1) upon the
written request of 25 residents, provided that such request shall state the purpose for calling such meeting,
which purpose shall be set forth in the notice of such meeting; or (2) upon the affirmative vote of a majority of
residents in attendance at a regular or special meeting of the Town Assembly provided that any motion for the
calling of a special meeting shall state the purpose therefor, which purpose shall be set forth in the notice
thereof. Notice of the time, date and place of any special meeting of the Town Assembly shall be mailed to all
residents at least 5 days before the date thereof.
(c) At all meetings of the Town Assembly thirty-five (35) residents shall constitute a quorum for the enactment of all
ordinances, the adoption of all resolutions and motions, and the transaction of all business properly before the
Town Assembly.
(d) Each resident attending a meeting of the Town Assembly shall have one vote on each matter brought before
such meeting. The Secretary of the Town Assembly shall take the yeas and nays and, unless otherwise
specified in this Act, a majority of the yeas shall be sufficient to pass all ordinances, resolutions and motions at
any meeting of the Town Assembly and to transact all business properly brought before the meeting.
(e) No ordinance of the Village shall be voted upon by the Town Assembly unless submitted to the Town Assembly
in writing and read at the two consecutive meetings, whether regular or special, next preceding the meeting at
which such ordinance shall be voted upon.
(f) The Town Assembly shall determine its own rules and order of business and shall keep a journal of its
proceedings and the yeas and nays which shall be taken upon the passage of every ordinance and resolution.
(g) The Town Assembly shall elect a resident to serve as Chairman of the Town Assembly who shall preside at all
meetings thereof. The Chairman shall serve for a term of one (1) year or until his successor is duly elected by
the Town Assembly in accordance with the provisions hereof. The signature, certifications or attestation of the
Chairman of the Town Assembly to any document pertaining to the affairs of the Village called for by any act,
statute, rule or regulation of the State of Delaware or any agency thereof shall be good and sufficient
compliance therewith, notwithstanding that such act, statute, rule or regulation designates such document to
be signed, certified or attested by the Mayor, City Manager, President of Council or like designated chief
executive of an incorporated municipality of the State of Delaware.
(h) The Town Assembly shall elect a resident to serve as Secretary of the Town Assembly for a term of one year or
until his successor is duly elected by the Town Assembly in accordance with the provisions hereof. The
Secretary shall have charge and custody of the books, journal, records, papers and other effects of the Village
and shall keep the same in a safe and secure place. He shall keep a full and complete record of all of the
transactions of the Town Assembly. He shall file and keep in a safe place the seal of the Village and all papers
and documents arising out of the proceedings of the Town Assembly and relative to the affairs of the Village.
He shall deliver the same to his successor in office. He shall attest the seal of the Village when authorized by
the Town Assembly and shall perform such duties and have such other powers as may be prescribed by
ordinance. All books, records and journals of the Village in the custody of the Secretary may, in the presence of
the Secretary, be inspected by any resident, Trustee or leaseholder of the Village desiring legitimate
information at any time or times as may be convenient. The compensation of the Secretary for his duties as
such, shall be determined by the Town Assembly.
Committees of the Town Assembly
Section 6
(a) The Town Assembly may elect such officials, including a Treasurer, and such agents, committees and
commissioners of the Village which the Town Assembly may deem proper and necessary for the management
of the Village and for the operation and enforcement of this Act and of any ordinances and resolutions adopted
hereinunder. Any person so elected shall be a resident of the Village and shall serve at the pleasure of the
Town Assembly but in no event longer than two years unless re-elected.
(b) All persons presently serving on committees of the Town Assembly shall continue in office until their
successors are duly elected in the manner herein provided.
Board of Assessors
Section 7
(a) The Board of Assessors shall consist of seven (7) residents and one non-voting alternate elected in the manner herein provided: Candidates
for the Board of Assessors shall be nominated by the Town Assembly at its regular September meeting of each
year. No later than 45 days after such nomination, the Registration Committee of the Village shall mail ballots
containing the names of all nominees to each resident of the Village. The ballots shall be in such form as the
Registration Committee shall prescribe and shall contain suitable boxes for marking the choices of the voters.
Each resident shall return his marked ballot to the Registration Committee within 30 days after the mailing
thereof. The Registration Committee shall tally the votes cast and report the results of the election at the first
regular meeting of the Town Assembly following the election. The election and the result thereof shall be
governed by the Hare System of Proportional Representation.
(b) The members of the Board of Assessors shall serve for one year or until their successors are duly elected in
accordance with the provisions of this Act. If a regular member is no longer able to serve, the alternate will become a voting member.
(c) The duties of the Board of Assessors shall consist of assessing the full rental value of leased lands in the
Village. The Board shall conduct two hearings during May and June of each year which shall be open to all
residents, Trustees and leaseholders of the Village. Notice of the time, date and place of each hearing shall be
mailed to all residents, leaseholders and Trustees at least five (5) days before such hearing. The Board shall
fix rules and regulations for the conduct of the hearings, provided that reasonable opportunity shall be afforded
to all persons entitled to notice thereof to be heard at such bearings. The Board shall report its assessment
rate to the regular June meeting of the Town Assembly.
(d) The Assessors shall, before assuming office, take an oath of office before any person qualified under the Laws
of the State of Delaware, to administer oaths, which oath shall be in the following form: "I.............. do solemnly
swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully perform and discharge my duties as Assessor of Arden to the best of my
ability and that I will as nearly as possible assess the full rental value or community standard of living for Arden
lands as required by the Deed of Trust and the Leases of Arden."
(e) The assessment rate determined by the Board for the assessment of Arden lands shall be final and conclusive,
provided that any leaseholder of the Village shall have the right to appeal such determination by submitting a
proposed assessment rate to the Town Assembly at its regular September meeting. In the event that such
proposed rate shall receive the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the residents voting at such meeting, such
proposed rate and the rate determined by the Board shall both be submitted to a general referendum of the
residents of the Village. The referendum shall be conducted by the Registration Committee. The rate approved by a majority of votes cast shall be the rate in effect until redetermined in the manner herein provided.
(f) The Board of Assessors shall determine the applicability of differential factors to the application of the
assessment rate upon leaseholds in the Village. The Board shall afford leaseholders the opportunity to be
heard upon any question arising thereunder.
(g) It shall be the duty of the Board to keep and maintain a full and accurate record of its deliberations and
proceedings, including all information and data considered in its determinations. Such record shall be open to
the inspection of any Trustee, resident or leaseholder at any time or times as may be convenient. Upon the
expiration of their term in office, the assessors shall deliver the same to their successors.
Budget Committee
Section 8
(a) The Budget Committee shall consist of five residents of the Village elected by the Town Assembly. Three
members of the Committee shall be elected by the Town Assembly at its regular March meeting in each
odd-numbered year following the approval of this Act. Two members of the Committee shall be elected by the
Town Assembly at its regular March meeting in each even-numbered year following the approval of this Act.
Each member, so elected, shall serve in office for two years or until his successor is duly elected.
(b) The Budget Committee shall prepare a budget (1) reflecting the expenditure of Village funds, the use and
expenditure of which are not specifically governed by Federal, State or County laws, rules and regulations; and
(2) governing the expenditure of all monies derived from the collection of ground rents, the lawful use and expenditure of
which are now and hereafter subject to the approval and consent of the residents of the Village.
(c) The budget prepared by the Committee shall be reported to the Town Assembly at its regular September
meeting of each year. The Town Assembly may modify or amend all or any portion of the proposed budget. The budget,
with any amendments thereto, shall be approved by the Town Assembly and submitted to a general
referendum of the residents of the Village. The referendum shall be conducted by the Registration Committee
within 45 days after the regular September meeting of the Town Assembly. The Registration Committee shall
mail ballots to all residents of the Village. The ballots shall contain suitable boxes for marking the approval or
disapproval of the entire proposed budget and each item therein enumerated. No ballot shall be counted
unless received by the Registration Committee on or before a date fixed by the Committee which shall in no
event be less than fifteen (15) days from the date the Registration Committee mails the ballots to the residents
of the Village. The budget, if approved by a majority of the votes cast by the residents of the Village, shall govern the use and
expenditure of the monies therein specified for and during the fiscal year of the Village commencing March 25
next following the referendum.
Registration Committee
Section 9
(a) The Registration Committee shall consist of: (1) five residents of the Village elected by the Town Assembly.
Two members of the Committee shall be elected by the Town Assembly at its regular March meeting in each
odd-numbered year. Three members of the Committee shall be elected by the Town Assembly at its regular
March meeting in each even-numbered year. Each member, so elected, shall serve in office for two years or
until his/her successor is duly elected; and (2) the Senior Trustee of Arden and the Secretary of the Town
Assembly. The Clerk of the Trustees shall be an ex-officio member of this committee.
(b) The Registration Committee shall register all residents of the Village as defined in Section 3 of this Act and
shall keep a full and accurate record thereof which shall set forth the date each resident establishes his
residence. The registration record shall be conclusive evidence of the entitlement of the persons therein listed
to vote at meetings of the Town Assembly and referenda held hereunder.
(c) The Registration Committee shall supervise all referenda held hereunder and shall fix rules and regulations,
not in consistent with the provision of this act, for the proper and orderly conduct thereof. The Registration
Committee shall certify in writing to the Town Assembly and to the Trustees the results of all referenda held
hereunder. 69 Del. Laws, c. 30
Vacancies
Section 10
In case of vacancy created in any office established under the provisions of this Act and the doings of the Town
Assembly by reason of death, resignation, loss of residence in the Village, conviction of a felony or otherwise, the Town
Assembly, at the earliest possible meeting, shall elect some suitable person to serve the unexpired term of such office.
Powers and Ordinances
Section 11
The Village shall have all powers possible for the Village to have under the Constitution and laws of Delaware as fully
and completely as though they were specifically enumerated by this Act. In furtherance thereof, the Town Assembly is
hereby vested with the authority to enact ordinances and adopt resolutions relating to any subject within the powers or
functions of the Village, or relating to the government of the Village, its peace and order, its sanitation, beauty, the health,
safety, convenience and comfort of its population, and the protection and preservation of property and to fix, impose and
enforce the payment of fines and penalties for the violation of such ordinances or resolutions, and no provision of this
Charter as to ordinances or resolutions on any particular subject shall be held to be restrictive of the power to enact
ordinances or resolutions on any subject not specifically enumerated. Notwithstanding any statute, act or law of the State of
Delaware to the contrary, the power to acquire and/or to vacate the use of lands, tenements, personalty, property,
easements, rights of way or any interest in property within the limits of the Village, as described in Section 2 hereof, by way
of condemnation and eminent domain shall be and is vested exclusively in the Town Assembly; provided, however, that the
Town Assembly may, but is not obliged to do so, consent to the exercise of any such power by an agency, commission or
department of the State of Delaware for any lawful purpose.
The Village may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions and may participate in the financing thereof,
jointly or in cooperation, by contract or otherwise with any one or more states or civil divisions or agencies thereof, including
the government of New Castle County, or the United States or any agency thereof.
It shall be the duty of the Town Assembly, at a reasonable time or times, to compile the ordinances, codes, orders and
rules of the Town Assembly of the Village. The Town Assembly shall have a reasonable number of copies printed for the
use of the officials of the Village and for public information. From time to time, upon the enactment of new ordinances,
codes, rules and regulations, or upon the enactment of amendments to the same, the Secretary of the Town Assembly shall
enroll the same in the journal of the Town Assembly and keep copies of the same in a book to be provided for that purpose
so that the same may be readily examined.
Enforcement, Fines and Penalties
Section 12
(a) The Justices of the Peace sitting (whether regularly, specially or otherwise) in the Justice of the Peace Court
located nearest to the Village shall have jurisdiction and cognizance of all offenses against the provisions of
this Act or the authorized ordinances of the Village committed within the limits of the Village as far as to arrest
and hold to bail or fine and imprison offenders; provided that he shall impose no fine or penalty in excess of
that fixed by the ordinance and shall not commit to prison for a longer term than 30 days. The New Castle
County Correctional Institution may be used for imprisonment under the provisions of this Act provided that the
Town Assembly shall pay for the board of persons committed for breaches of ordinances which are not
breaches of the general law.
(b) No ordinance of the Village shall provide for a fine in excess of $100 or imprisonment of more than 30 days.
(c) Any person convicted before such Justice of the Peace for the violation of any Village ordinance may appeal
from such conviction to the Superior Court in and for New Castle County upon giving bond to the State with or
without surety, as such Justice of the Peace shall determine, binding the person taking the appeal to appear
before the Court. Notice of such an appeal shall be given to such Justice of the Peace within five (5) days from
the time of conviction, counting the day of conviction as one, and the bond with surety, if any, shall be filed
within five (5) days. No bond upon appeal from a conviction for violation of a Village ordinance shall exceed the
sum of one hundred dollars ($100). Such appeal shall be prosecuted and the proceedings shall be had as in an
appeal from a conviction before a Justice of the Peace in the case of a violation of the laws relating to the
operation of motor vehicles.
Police Force
Section 13
The Town Assembly may appoint a police force consisting of such person or persons as the Town Assembly may deem
wise and advisable. The Town Assembly shall from time to time, upon recommendations of its Safety Committee, adopt
rules and regulations as may be necessary for the organization, government and control of the police force. The members
of the force shall be subject to the direction of the Town Assembly and may be removed by the Town Assembly at any time.
They shall preserve peace and order and shall compel obedience within the Village limits to the ordinances of the Village
and the laws of the State; and they shall have such other duties as the Town Assembly shall from time to time prescribe.
Each member of the police force shall be vested with all powers and authority of a constable of New Castle County
within the Village limits and within one mile outside such limits, and in the case of the pursuit of an offender, his power and
authority shall extend to all parts of the State of Delaware.
Every person sentenced to imprisonment by the Justice of the Peace, as provided in Section 12 of this Act, shall be
delivered by a member of the police force to the New Castle County Correctional Institution, to be there imprisoned for the
term of the sentence.
It shall be the duty of the police to suppress riotous, disorderly or turbulent assemblages of persons in the streets and
public places of the Village, or the noisy conduct of any person in the same, and upon view of the above, or upon the view
of the violation of any ordinance of the Village relating to the peace and good order thereof, the police shall have the right
and power to arrest without warrant and to take the offender before the Justice of the Peace, as aforesaid.
Contracts of the Town Assembly
Section 14
The Town Assembly is vested with authority on behalf of the Village to enter into contracts for the rendering of services
to the Village and/or the purchase of supplies and doing of work for any municipal purpose of the Village. All formal
contracts shall be signed by the Chairman of the Town Assembly, with the seal of the Village attached and attested by the
Secretary of the Town Assembly.
Fire, Zoning and Housing Codes
Section 15
For protection against fire and for the preservation of the beauty of the Village and the health of the inhabitants, the
Town Assembly may adopt ordinances to zone or district the Village and to make particular provisions for particular zones
or districts with regard to buildings and building materials; to prohibit the use of building materials that may be deemed to
create a fire hazard, and this power shall embrace new buildings or additions to or alterations of existing structures of every
kind, to condemn and/or vacate buildings or structures, or portions thereof, that constitute a fire and/or health menace and
to require or cause the same to be torn down or removed or so altered as to eliminate the menace of fire or danger to
health; to prescribe the height and thickness of walls of any building and the kind and grade of materials used in the
construction thereof; and to establish a building line for buildings to be erected.
The Town Assembly may adopt zoning ordinances limiting and specifying districts and regulating thereon buildings,
structures and uses according to their construction and according to the nature and extent of the use or business to be
carried on therein.
The powers to be exercised under and by virtue of this Section shall be deemed to have been exercised under the
police power and for the general welfare of the inhabitants of the Village.
The Town Assembly may create a Village Zoning Commission for the development, improvement and beautification of
the Village and may prescribe its powers and duties.
The Town Assembly may provide for the issuance of building permits and may forbid the construction of any new
building or the addition to, or alteration or repair of any existing building unless a building permit has been obtained
therefor.
The Town Assembly may adopt a housing code to regulate and govern the occupancy of residential structures in the
Village, the structural requirements of residential and commercial properties for the health, safety, welfare and comfort of
occupants thereof, and to appoint a commission to carry out and enforce the provisions of the housing code.
Savings Clause
Section 16
All ordinances, resolutions and motions adopted by the Commissioners of the Village of Arden and in force at the time
of the approval, acceptance and going into effect of this Act are continued in force until the same or any of them, shall be
repealed, modified or altered by the Town Assembly under the provisions of this Act. All the acts and doings of the
Commissioners of the Village of Arden or of any official of the Village of Arden which shall have been lawfully done or
performed under the laws of this State, prior to the approval, acceptance and going into effect of this Act are hereby ratified
and confirmed unless otherwise provided herein.
Severability
Section 17
If any part of this Act shall be held unconstitutional, such holding shall not in anywise invalidate the remaining
provisions of this Act.
Section 18
This Act shall be deemed and taken to be a public Act.
56 Del. Laws, c. 125; 58 Del. Laws, c. 91; 69 Del. Laws, c. 30
